# Must-knows

## Send your travel info

If you want to be picked up at the airport, please send us your travel details
as soon as possible.

## Upload your slides

<*RustFest had a person with vision impairments attending. Therefore we asked
our speakers to provide their slides (or some drafts at least) 2-3 weeks before
the conference, as it takes some time and work to make them accessible to that
person.*>

Also, please prefer uploading a draft soon (possibly now), even if it doesn't
have all content or just a beginning. It helps catching problems when
converting your slides early on! Please try to have something in that folder by
Sunday, <*1 week before the conference*>, latest.

Because of this, please read the section on [accessible talks on the
conference](#Giving%20accessible%20talks),
and try to act by it.

Please note that our [Code of Conduct](http://www.rustfest.eu/code-of-conduct/)
applies to slide material and talk content.

## Technology

<*General information about the screen and mic setup, planned licenses for
publication, and talk transcription (if applicable).*>

## Things to do before the talk

Please try to be on time so that we can arrange a technology check.

Please meet our master of ceremonies before the talk section to make sure they
have something nice to say about you. Maybe come up with something yourself,
something about an area of interest or a little personal story you are
comfortable with someone telling on stage.

If all this is new to you, refer to the relevant part in the beginners section.

## Giving accessible talks

Everyone should be able to follow your talks, so here's a few guidelines. It's
not even much you have to do _and_ it improves your talk for everyone.

First of all, you probably have an accent, even if you don't realise. For that
reason, try to speak slow, clearly and loud. Make an effort not to be too fast.

Make sure you don't cover your mouth on stage. People with hearing impairments
will thank you.

Second, explain anything that is on your slides, even in their spatial
relationship. ("To the left, you see A, down at the bottom, there's B and their
relationship is a road over point C")

This is especially important for people with any kind of visual impairments.

Please don't make trivial jokes like "let's say something really hard just to
have her cope with that" with the transcription interpreter. This has sadly
been an issue before. Interaction with her is fine, though, keep it sincere!
