## Subject matter, style of talks

RustFest is a community conference with many new people around, which means
that speaking about your experiences with the language and your reasons behind
using it trumps fine technical detail. It is a technical conference, still, so
your talk should definitely contain code where appropriate and explain it well.
Also, if your project uses a clever trick or unusual pattern that, do - by all
means - show it and explain it, even at the danger that some of the audience
might not fully follow. Just ensure that your talk is not completely packed
with those things - you are speaking to show, not to show off. Given our
standard talk length, probably 1-2 of those examples are enough, with ample
time for explanation. This obviously doesn't apply if your talk isn't a
technical talk.

The Rust community likes arguing and writing about things in a peaceful manner.
Constructing your talk as a series of arguments for your solution with one
based on the other is definitely a good way to go! Make your central statements
clearly visible!

All talks at RustFest (except keynotes) will be 30-40 minutes talks or
alternatively 25-35 minutes with questions and answers. You can select that
yourself, even spontaneously. Please notify the current stage host before.

We have a packed program, please try not to overrun.

## A day at the conferences

A day at the conference can be a little bit stressful, so be prepared on what
to expect. As with all other attendees, all organisers are there for you the
whole weekend. Please don't keep your questions to yourself, ask for help.

Arrive at the conference early, preferably at opening. This is very important
if your talk is in the morning.

This allows you to meet with the person managing the stage for final
preparations: checking your slides, making sure all adapters are available,
checking the microphone. It will also allow you to play through the motions
before going on stage properly.

Introduce yourself to the stage host and the master of ceremonies (MC). The
host will take care of of timing, notify you when to prepare to go on stage and
is your first point of contact. The master of ceremonies will introduce you on
stage. Give the MC the most important facts needed for announcing you (what's
your topic, the proper pronounciation of your name and your pronouns). If you
have any nice anectote you like being told as an introduction, say it! MCs work
with jokes, so maybe figure out something together!

If you have never given a talk before, here's a short run down of the process:
please arrive to your talk early, preferably at least 15 minutes before. If
your talk is the second of a set, get seated next to the stage entrance.

If headset microphones are used, please be aware of the process of getting the
microphone on, as this is a common source of stress. Preferably, have one of
the persons handling the stage put it on. This has turned out to a stressful
moment for unprepared people, as it involves light body contact in front of the
audience. Make yourself aware that it is also stressful for the person handing
you the microphone. Stand upright, don't move and make eye contact with the
other person, clearly indicating that you are ready to go. The other person
will talk you through the process and ask you for permission before touching
you ("may I put the receiver in that pocket?"). At any point during the
process, feel free to do things on your own. ("No, I'd prefer to put it there
myself.")
Don't rush, the talk is not going to start without you.

It is also fully acceptable to just choose a hand microphone.

Familiarise yourself with the room layout, especially find out where your
friends and the organisers are sitting. You might need them at some point.

Treat yourself exceptionally well during the day. This is highly individual
thing, so I'm just going to tell you my view on things:

During the day, I recommend to eat lightly and not right before the talk. Stage
fright is a thing and the body has the tendency to tell you that by having
digestion issues. If you know you have a strong stomach, feel free to ignore
that - if you never tried out, now is preferably not the best time to find out.
Also, care about your water intake in the hours before the talk, stage thirst
is worse then stage fright. Avoid acidic drinks.

I usually pick the shirt I wear for the day specifically for the talk and bring
that in a seperate bag. Right before the talk starts, I go to the bathroom, get
a bit of fresh water in my face and change. This is a ritual that works for me
and makes me feel better and calmer right away.

After the talk, stick around a little, people might have questions. It's
appropriate to leave the after-talk discussions after some time, especially
if you have to wind down. Point people to later opportunities to speak to you.
Excusing yourself because you are stressed after the talk is fine. Feel free to
skip later parts of the program if you feel unconcentrated after a talk.

## Your time on stage

Once you are on stage, the room is all yours, except for:

* You ask someone to help you
* There are technical issues
* There is no mic stand and a fellow organiser acts as one (true story)
* You took too long

Assuming you have prepared your talk, nothing will go wrong :).

First of all, orient yourself and make sure you know where the organisers are
sitting, again.

Find some faces in the crowd you like and try to speak to them.

If, against all odds, things do go wrong, internalize the following set of
rules:

* Don't excuse yourself right after going on stage. You are as prepared as you
  are.
* Jokes are no way out of problematic situations and put you at risk of making
  things worse.
* Jokes are a great way out of happy little mistakes and blunders.
* If you say something you don't want to and its possibly something people
  might get angry about, excuse yourself immediately. People misspeak. People
  correct themselves. Train that in front of a mirror so that you have
  something handy if that happens.

The last point isn't here for show. It happens regularly that people realise on
stage that something they wrote and never read in a certain way is something
very inappropriate when they are on stage. The best way out is a quick and
direct "never read it that way, I'm really sorry".

Make pauses. Pauses are good for the audience and for you.

Same goes for the question section: train some answers. Q&A is a great part of
a talk, but sometimes, you just don't know the answer. Questions can be
inappropriate, missing the point or raise a topic that needs another 30
minutes.
Have standard reactions at hand:

* "I don't know right away, I'd have to look that up."
  - That's fine, even if it is your own piece of software
* "I cannot answer that in a minute, can we discuss that later?"

On inappropriate questions, please feel free to state how you feel. If you feel
like you don't have support, make eye contact with the stage host for
reassurance.

Your mentor will help you with all of those things.

## Constructing a talk

I'm going to focus on the 25-30 minutes talks here. If you are an experienced
speaker and have found your own talk format, feel free to ignore all of the
below. If you are a new speaker, also feel free to change anything you want.
Maybe someone else really inspired you with their way of constructing an
argument. Note that construction and delivery is something different, a talk
that is constructed in the same way can both be delivered as a funny talk or as
a rant.

I usually allocate the following for 25-30 minutes talks:

* Introduction of yourself (1 minute, preferably 30 seconds)
* Short overview of the problem solved
* Overview of the solution with hallmark features or findings
* Detailed overview with interesting findings
* Summary, outlook and review, reminding of the core ideas

The introduction serves to establish your background and how you relate to the
problem. For example, if you are not a developer but instead a user of the
software you present, say so. Don't turn this into navel-gazing. If you have
previous works and large projects of unrelated kinds, cut any mention of them
short. Also make sure you mention Twitter and Github accounts briefly if you
want people to find you.

The next three topics merit about equal sizes of the rest of your talk. All
should be somehow closed, like chapters in a book. Still, make sure you base
things on each other. If you mention an aspect during the problem statement,
make sure you will show a solution for it later. If you can't, it's probably
better to leave that aspect out of your talk. Not every aspect has to run
as a thread through the whole talk. For example, if you introduced a hallmark
feature in the second part and it has a really interesting implementation
detail, by all means, introduce that by the end, even if it doesn't
specifically relate to the problem.

Do not only talk about the positive parts. If you struggled with something,
feel free to mention that.

The final part allows you to both review the lessons learned, give outlook to
the future and also bring points home that were _really_ important. This can be
as long or short as you want.

Make sure you make a good argument for what you did or intend to do!

## Delivering a talk

Delivery is important for an amazing talk. If you don't feel like you are great
at delivery, that's also not bad. People are at this conference to learn about
technology and will be fine if you get your point across properly.

For that reason, if you feel like your talk is still missing something, it's
probably not memes and jokes. Get back to the construction part. If you think
your talk works well with a rather usual delivery, you may come back here.

The most important part of delivery is connecting the dots you layed out for
you in a fashion understandable to the listener. If something is based on
something that came before, refer back to it verbally ("Remember that our
problem was connecting point A to point B through C?"). If you have a key point,
make sure you hit it.
Train that. You don't have to have your whole talk in your head and can
probably talk about your favourite topic for 20 minutes straight anyways, but
key points should not to be missed.

Your English skills will be a secondary matter. You have a story to tell and
are an expert on your topic, people will appreciate you passing on knowledge.

Also, as it is a recurring issue: if you intend to joke during your talk, make
sure that you can deliver it well. Rehearse. People might still not get it, be
prepared for that.

On the topic of jokes, again: lighthearted talks are great and humor is cool.
Mind that not everyone shares your sense of humor and you have 200 people in
front of you.  If you joke backfires and people don't appreciate it, or at
worst insults people, you have been warned. No "I'm sorry if I offended you".
This misstep is yours.

So probably jokes about current social issues are out of line, especially on a
tech conference. Still, this line isn't clear cut, always be mindful of the
position you speak from.

My usual recommendation here is to have jokes based on your subject matter. IT
has a very special set up jokes. Finally an audience where you can make jokes
about sending a UDP package from point A to point B over a point C and people
might get it. Use that ability!

Never overdo it though. If you are only starting out on stage, keep it low.

Finally, swearing and curse-words. While we don't put any rules on their usage,
please consider that some people find them off-putting. They might still fit
your persona. Still, there lurks a danger here: if you can only make your point
by using curse language, how strong is your point? Making strong statements
without resorting to those tricks makes your statements more rememberable. Also
remember that cursing, especially about other peoples words, can quickly be
disrespectful.

In my experience from 5 years of running conferences, the clearly-stated,
well-constructed, well-spoken talks with a good measure of warmth and humor are
the most remembered. Of the others, I remember only the jokes.

## Slide design

As weird as it may sound, I don't have much input there. Have a look at some
talks around the internet - maybe you are better at connecting visual dots like
images (remember those that cannot see them). Maybe you prefer just putting
claims on slides and deliver the arguments verbally. Experiment a little.

Make sure that each slide is either transitioning between two of your important
points or making one of those points, never both. Make sure you have some way
to make clear where a topic begins and ends.

There's tons of nice ways to create slides out there. Pick one that allows you
to quickly iterate on slides and change things. You might have the best idea
ever 50 minutes before the talk, it should be easy to make this happen.

Don't design for later release of the slides.

Add speaker notes for slides that are not clearly understandable, though, such
as bare images.
